README.md, before:

# Drops of Jupyter
The Longevity Dilemma - An analysis on the diabetic population and the future impact that living longer. 

![—Pngtree—rapid diabetes testingfinger test_5423791](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/108758105/207190013-7b26bacb-4ddd-4c04-a8f0-0581567a4a29.png)

(we want: background/educational information
the topic/question/problem/issue we are analyzing
the objective/how we are going to solve/analyze/tackle this issue
Results and walkthrough of the analysis
Conclusion of the data analysis + other thoughts
Resources or citations used for credit where due
optional - list of files in our repo and what they are, the purpose, how to read them, extra info of the files.

## Overview
### Topic
- An analysis of the population and diabetic related variables 
- Use supervised machine learning to predict who will have diabetic 
- Use SQL and Tableau to understand the demographics of regions and the Diabetes outcomes

### Background

- According to the US census, we are nearing a point in history where the older population will outnumber the younger.  
- “By 2034 (previously 2035), there will be 77.0 million (previously 78.0) people 65 years and older compared to 76.5 million (previously 76.7 million) under the age of 18.” 

- The CDC states in its national DIABETES STATISTICS REPORT THAT:
    - 37.3 MILLION PEOPLE HAVE DIABETES (~11% OF the US POPULATION) 
    - 96 MILLION ARE PREDIABETIC (38% OF the ADULT POPULATION) 
    - 26.4 MILLION OF THOSE PREDIABETIC ARE 65 YEARS OR OLDER (~50% OF THE SENIOR POPULATION) 
    - In the last 20 years, diabetes diagnoses have more than doubled.

- Diabetes is:
    - The Leading cause of kidney failure, lower-limb amputations, and adult blindness. 
    - The 7th leading cause of death 

- Problem: 
    - Given the extent that diabetes has affected our country, and its contribution to devastating comorbidities, particularly in the end stages, it is concerning that those years of extreme poor health will be extended.
    
    - With the advances in medicine, Americans will live with these chronic conditions for many more years, and with an already strained healthcare system, we will have to prepare for far more dialysis, prosthetics, and resources for the blind due to diabete's direct impact on these health conditions. 
    
    - This will amplify for those in lower socioeconomic communities who studies show are disproportionately affected by diabetes in comparison to those communities of higher education and economic status. 

### Objective

This analysis aims to determine how diabetes continues to trend in America.  Knowing that communities of lower socioeconomic status are more heavily impacted, we want to see what it will take for those populations to have the resources necessary in preparation for living longer with diabetes. 

### Questions to address with this study

- What demographic socioeconomic factors are correlated with diabetes?
- Based on these factors, who will likely get diabetes? 
- How successfully can demographics and socioeconomic status predict diabetes?
- Are there any other findings that can be inferred from the analysis?
- What are changes/solutions that can be made to positively impact this issue?

### Communication Protocols

Our team is made up of 4 individuals each working using different tools. To streamline our communication to better support each other we have developed these protocols. 
- Weekly assignments for each team member to complete
- Daily Check-ins Via Slack 
    - Report what you were able to complete each day at 7pm, as well as where you struggled and how your team can support you. 
        - If nothing to report, still check in and support team in whatever challenges they faced that day.
-In case of emergency contact Elina (###)###-####.
- Meeting via zoom 2-3 times per week to merge git hub, review code, and resolve conflicts together.
 
### Description of the data sources

- 2021 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
    - link: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/2021nhis.htm
    - Table: Sample adult interview
        - Demographics
        - Health status: diabetes
        - Insurance
        - Income
    - adult-summary.pdf
        - This PDF contains the entries/data that we used for this analysis.
    - adult-codebook.pdf
        - This PDF contains the key's for the variables in the adult-summary.pdf.

## Technologies Used
### Data Cleaning and Analysis
The team used Jupyter Notebook, Python, Pandas and Numpy to extract, transform the data and load to SQL database. In this process we explored the data with the support of the data Summary and Codebook to translate the coded categorical data. Then using Tableau we visualized the data in a series of pie charts, and graphs. Further analysis was completed using Machine Learning and Logistic Regression. 

### Database Storage
PGAdmin is the database tool we have used. We imported cleaned and transformed CSVs using Pandas and integrated the data into our other analysis tools. PgAdmin4 can also be used to perform analysis. The images below include the ERD, which illustrates the structure of Database. Additionally, we have added an image to depict a join query that joins our tables so a user can compare socia-economic demographics along side an individual's health status. 

![ERD](https://github.com/DaniliukK95/Drops_Of_Jupyter/blob/e1182de36d7d52bbcd8f819ee655abede02891bf/images/ERD_12_21_22.png)

![Join](https://github.com/DaniliukK95/Drops_Of_Jupyter/blob/29c761926660afb86efdce3850198d08b267529b/images/Join%20Query%20.png)

#### Our Sample Data contains:
  - Over 29,000 observations
  - 3,134 individuals with Diabetes
  - This is just over 10% and comprabable with population estimates. 
  - 45% of our sample is male 
  - 75% White, 11% African American, 6% Asian
  - Average Poverty Ratio is 4 (meaning income is 4 times the national poverty threshold)
  - 39% have attained at least a Bachelor's Degree
  

### Machine Learning
#### Description of preliminary data processing with Machine Learning
- First, all data is imported from the database into the google colab notebook that implements
  the Machine Learning 
- [scikit-Learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/) is the machine learning data analysis 
  library we used to create our supervised and unsupervised models.
- Handle categorical attributes with get dummies code

#### Description of data features selection
- Features:  variables in demographics (age, sex, race, education, poverty ratio, and region), diabetic-related health status, general health status, weight and BMI. 
- Target: Diabetes

#### Description of how data is split into training and test set
- Data is split into training and testing sets by using Scikit-learn’s train_test_split function.
- We end up with four sets:  X is split into X_train and X_test sets, and y is split into 
  y_train and y_test sets. 

#### Model 1: Logistic regression 

- We chose logistic regression to measure the feature correlation probability to the target, 
  Diabetes. 
- All variables (except for weight, age, and poverty_ratio) are categorical variables. 
- The target variable only has two possible values, whether a person has been diagnosed with diabetes before or no.  When this classification model encounters new data, it predicts whether the individual would have diabetes.
- Data is pre-processed with [preprocesssing module](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/preprocessing.html.).
- Data is split into random training and test subsets with [the model_seletion module](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.train_test_split.html).
- Benefit:  logistic regression is relatively simple to execute and understand. 
- Limitation: the accuracies from one or multiple variables are low.  Based on the data 
  visualization below,   linear regression is more suitable.
- Fig. BMI and diabetes 

    ![Screen Shot 2022-12-23 at 8 35 59 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/108419097/209344805-3d15a517-42ab-423e-92f1-af975aeb4369.png)


#### Model 2: Unsupervised Model 

#### Explanation of model choices: Logistic regression 

-	We choose logistic regression to predict diabetes based on socio-economical factors.  
-	All variables (except BMI, age, and income-to-poverty ratio) are categorical. 
-	The target variable only has two possible outcomes, whether a person has diabetes or not.  When this classification model encounters new data, it predicts whether the individual has diabetes.
- Data is pre-processed with [preprocesssing module](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/preprocessing.html.).
- Data is split into random training and test subsets with [the model_seletion module](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.train_test_split.html).
-	Benefit:  logistic regression is relatively simple to execute and understand. 
- Limitation: the accuracies from one or multiple variables are low.  

We also tried linear regression and unsupervised learning to see whether they generated interesting results. 

### Dashboard
[Exploratory analysis](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/amy8818/viz/finalproject_16711568635250/Story1?publish=yes)

In addition to using [Tableau](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/amy8818/viz/finalproject_16711568635250/Story2?publish=yes), we have also integrated D3.js for a fully functioning and interactive dashboard website. It is hosted on ___ (Gitpages).

### Tools
>**Languages:** <br>
>Python, JavaScript, PostgreSQL <br> 
>**Software:** <br>
>VS Code, JupyterNotebook, Pandas, Numpy, Scikit-Learn, pgAdmin4, GoogleCollab, TableauPublic, Github, Bootstrap, HTML, CSS<br>
>**Resources:** <br>
>2021 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), Google, Stack Overflow

Commit message:

Updates to readme
Links to users. Changing title and group name part.

README.md, after:

# The Longevity Dilemma
Drops of Jupyter group - 

[Amy Ying Lin](https://github.com/amyylin1),
[Elina Dart](https://github.com/DartElina),
[Manny Linares](https://github.com/MRLinares),
[Kevin Daniliuk](https://github.com/DaniliukK95)

 - An analysis on the diabetic population and the future impact that living longer. 

![—Pngtree—rapid diabetes testingfinger test_5423791](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/108758105/207190013-7b26bacb-4ddd-4c04-a8f0-0581567a4a29.png)

(we want: background/educational information
the topic/question/problem/issue we are analyzing
the objective/how we are going to solve/analyze/tackle this issue
Results and walkthrough of the analysis
Conclusion of the data analysis + other thoughts
Resources or citations used for credit where due
optional - list of files in our repo and what they are, the purpose, how to read them, extra info of the files.

## Overview
### Topic
- An analysis of the population and diabetic related variables 
- Use supervised machine learning to predict who will have diabetic 
- Use SQL and Tableau to understand the demographics of regions and the Diabetes outcomes

### Background

- According to the US census, we are nearing a point in history where the older population will outnumber the younger.  
- “By 2034 (previously 2035), there will be 77.0 million (previously 78.0) people 65 years and older compared to 76.5 million (previously 76.7 million) under the age of 18.” 

- The CDC states in its national DIABETES STATISTICS REPORT THAT:
    - 37.3 MILLION PEOPLE HAVE DIABETES (~11% OF the US POPULATION) 
    - 96 MILLION ARE PREDIABETIC (38% OF the ADULT POPULATION) 
    - 26.4 MILLION OF THOSE PREDIABETIC ARE 65 YEARS OR OLDER (~50% OF THE SENIOR POPULATION) 
    - In the last 20 years, diabetes diagnoses have more than doubled.

- Diabetes is:
    - The Leading cause of kidney failure, lower-limb amputations, and adult blindness. 
    - The 7th leading cause of death 

- Problem: 
    - Given the extent that diabetes has affected our country, and its contribution to devastating comorbidities, particularly in the end stages, it is concerning that those years of extreme poor health will be extended.
    
    - With the advances in medicine, Americans will live with these chronic conditions for many more years, and with an already strained healthcare system, we will have to prepare for far more dialysis, prosthetics, and resources for the blind due to diabete's direct impact on these health conditions. 
    
    - This will amplify for those in lower socioeconomic communities who studies show are disproportionately affected by diabetes in comparison to those communities of higher education and economic status. 

### Objective

This analysis aims to determine how diabetes continues to trend in America.  Knowing that communities of lower socioeconomic status are more heavily impacted, we want to see what it will take for those populations to have the resources necessary in preparation for living longer with diabetes. 

### Questions to address with this study

- What demographic socioeconomic factors are correlated with diabetes?
- Based on these factors, who will likely get diabetes? 
- How successfully can demographics and socioeconomic status predict diabetes?
- Are there any other findings that can be inferred from the analysis?
- What are changes/solutions that can be made to positively impact this issue?

### Communication Protocols

Our team is made up of 4 individuals each working using different tools. To streamline our communication to better support each other we have developed these protocols. 
- Weekly assignments for each team member to complete
- Daily Check-ins Via Slack 
    - Report what you were able to complete each day at 7pm, as well as where you struggled and how your team can support you. 
        - If nothing to report, still check in and support team in whatever challenges they faced that day.
-In case of emergency contact Elina (###)###-####.
- Meeting via zoom 2-3 times per week to merge git hub, review code, and resolve conflicts together.
 
### Description of the data sources

- 2021 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
    - link: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/2021nhis.htm
    - Table: Sample adult interview
        - Demographics
        - Health status: diabetes
        - Insurance
        - Income
    - adult-summary.pdf
        - This PDF contains the entries/data that we used for this analysis.
    - adult-codebook.pdf
        - This PDF contains the key's for the variables in the adult-summary.pdf.

## Technologies Used
### Data Cleaning and Analysis
The team used Jupyter Notebook, Python, Pandas and Numpy to extract, transform the data and load to SQL database. In this process we explored the data with the support of the data Summary and Codebook to translate the coded categorical data. Then using Tableau we visualized the data in a series of pie charts, and graphs. Further analysis was completed using Machine Learning and Logistic Regression. 

### Database Storage
PGAdmin is the database tool we have used. We imported cleaned and transformed CSVs using Pandas and integrated the data into our other analysis tools. PgAdmin4 can also be used to perform analysis. The images below include the ERD, which illustrates the structure of Database. Additionally, we have added an image to depict a join query that joins our tables so a user can compare socia-economic demographics along side an individual's health status. 

![ERD](https://github.com/DaniliukK95/Drops_Of_Jupyter/blob/e1182de36d7d52bbcd8f819ee655abede02891bf/images/ERD_12_21_22.png)

![Join](https://github.com/DaniliukK95/Drops_Of_Jupyter/blob/29c761926660afb86efdce3850198d08b267529b/images/Join%20Query%20.png)

#### Our Sample Data contains:
  - Over 29,000 observations
  - 3,134 individuals with Diabetes
  - This is just over 10% and comprabable with population estimates. 
  - 45% of our sample is male 
  - 75% White, 11% African American, 6% Asian
  - Average Poverty Ratio is 4 (meaning income is 4 times the national poverty threshold)
  - 39% have attained at least a Bachelor's Degree
  

### Machine Learning
#### Description of preliminary data processing with Machine Learning
- First, all data is imported from the database into the google colab notebook that implements
  the Machine Learning 
- [scikit-Learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/) is the machine learning data analysis 
  library we used to create our supervised and unsupervised models.
- Handle categorical attributes with get dummies code

#### Description of data features selection
- Features:  variables in demographics (age, sex, race, education, poverty ratio, and region), diabetic-related health status, general health status, weight and BMI. 
- Target: Diabetes

#### Description of how data is split into training and test set
- Data is split into training and testing sets by using Scikit-learn’s train_test_split function.
- We end up with four sets:  X is split into X_train and X_test sets, and y is split into 
  y_train and y_test sets. 

#### Model 1: Logistic regression 

- We chose logistic regression to measure the feature correlation probability to the target, 
  Diabetes. 
- All variables (except for weight, age, and poverty_ratio) are categorical variables. 
- The target variable only has two possible values, whether a person has been diagnosed with diabetes before or no.  When this classification model encounters new data, it predicts whether the individual would have diabetes.
- Data is pre-processed with [preprocesssing module](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/preprocessing.html.).
- Data is split into random training and test subsets with [the model_seletion module](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.train_test_split.html).
- Benefit:  logistic regression is relatively simple to execute and understand. 
- Limitation: the accuracies from one or multiple variables are low.  Based on the data 
  visualization below,   linear regression is more suitable.
- Fig. BMI and diabetes 

    ![Screen Shot 2022-12-23 at 8 35 59 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/108419097/209344805-3d15a517-42ab-423e-92f1-af975aeb4369.png)


#### Model 2: Unsupervised Model 

#### Explanation of model choices: Logistic regression 

-	We choose logistic regression to predict diabetes based on socio-economical factors.  
-	All variables (except BMI, age, and income-to-poverty ratio) are categorical. 
-	The target variable only has two possible outcomes, whether a person has diabetes or not.  When this classification model encounters new data, it predicts whether the individual has diabetes.
- Data is pre-processed with [preprocesssing module](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/preprocessing.html.).
- Data is split into random training and test subsets with [the model_seletion module](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.model_selection.train_test_split.html).
-	Benefit:  logistic regression is relatively simple to execute and understand. 
- Limitation: the accuracies from one or multiple variables are low.  

We also tried linear regression and unsupervised learning to see whether they generated interesting results. 

### Dashboard
[Exploratory analysis](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/amy8818/viz/finalproject_16711568635250/Story1?publish=yes)

In addition to using [Tableau](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/amy8818/viz/finalproject_16711568635250/Story2?publish=yes), we have also integrated D3.js for a fully functioning and interactive dashboard website. It is hosted on ___ (Gitpages).

### Tools
>**Languages:** <br>
>Python, JavaScript, PostgreSQL <br> 
>**Software:** <br>
>VS Code, JupyterNotebook, Pandas, Numpy, Scikit-Learn, pgAdmin4, GoogleCollab, TableauPublic, Github, Bootstrap, HTML, CSS<br>
>**Resources:** <br>
>2021 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), Google, Stack Overflow
